hey guys looking back to another episode
of earthling weight-loss thank you for
tuning in again today today's video is
on a viewers question asking about salt
and water retention so I've mentioned in
previous videos that you know consuming
salt in one's diet can lead to puffiness
and bloating and perceived weight gain
so today's video will discuss why this
happens and how you can prevent it so
first of all sodium is an essential
nutrient for humans it is responsible
for the regulation of blood volume and
blood pressure other body fluids pH and
osmotic equilibrium it is also important
in a number of metabolic processes nerve
transmission and the activity of the
heart circulatory system and our muscles
sodium is so essential to get from our
diet that we have retained our salty
taste buds on our tongue for hundreds of
thousands of years so the body has a
complex system for maintaining an
optimal sodium balance you need a
minimum of 180 milligrams of sodium per
day consuming more than 2,300 milligrams
is considered unsafe according to the
Centers of Disease Control and
Prevention yet the average American gets
over 3,400 milligrams of sodium a day so
your body tries to maintain a sodium
water concentration outside of your cell
walls that is similar to seawater
when you consume sodium your body holds
on to the water within it in order to
keep that ideal concentration this is a
really cool fact here when you consume
400 milligrams of sodium your body will
compensate by retaining 4 cups of water
within your body and this is roughly
equal to about two pounds of water
weight
and that's only for 400 milligrams of
sodium you know you think of how much is
in one teaspoon of table salt and we get
two thousand three hundred and
twenty-five milligrams of sodium and so
if we do the math and we know that you
know the average person will consume
three thousand four hundred milligrams a
day this equates to 17 pounds of
retained water in the body roughly and
that's just due to added salts so a high
sodium diet can cause more issues than
just water weight gain it also elevates
your blood pressure because there's more
water in your blood trying to dilute the
salt and therefore there's more pressure
in your vessels and in your arteries and
this actually increases your risk of
having a heart attack or stroke so
sodium is highly tied to water within
our bodies the retention or loss of one
generally stimulates the same effect in
the other we have Osmo receptors in our
hypothalamus in the brain responsible
for sensing sodium and water balance
within our body when sodium is consumed
our bodies release water and so it can
escort the sodium out in our urine and
then we are left with less water so the
same Osmo receptors detect this states
and trigger a sensation of thirst to get
you to drink more water to replenish
your water stores so your body can
return to the proper concentrations of
electrolytes this is a big reason why
places like bars will offer salty snacks
like pretzels or peanuts the salt causes
us to become thirsty and then order more
alcoholic drinks so water tension may
occur because the pressure inside our
capillaries changes pillories our tiny
blood vessels that carry interstitial
fluid which is composed of nutrients
oxygen etc so our capillaries carry this
fluid into our surrounding tissues when
you eat too much salt it increases the
levels of sodium in your body so your
body will hold on to it will retain more
water to dilute this salt so the
retention of this fluid within our small
capillaries causes pressure within them
and then they start to leak out this
excess water into our surrounding
tissues when this fluid gets into the
tissue space between our cells this
causes edema which is water retention so
the more
fluid that's released the more and more
of it will actually remain in our skin
tissue rather than returning to our
capillaries so this results in swelling
and water logging
so basically when we consume salts it is
the water moving from our bloodstream to
our skin tissue that causes that puffy
look so if you are consuming cells in
your diet water retention is something
that you may be experiencing I think
it's a real pity that people stop the
diet when they perceive weight gain
because you know salt is just another
influencing factor as I said before you
know you could be holding up to
seventeen pounds of water weight if
you're consuming what average Americans
do so your minimum sodium requirement is
a hundred and eighty milligrams a day
and you will definitely reach this
minimum on a Whole Foods plant-based
diet basically plant foods contain a
sufficient amount of really any macro or
micro nutrient you know whether it's
protein carbohydrates fats vitamins
minerals it's available in plant sources
in a much better concentration than
you'd find in animal products if you
still do want to use additional salt on
your starch meals if they're a little
bit bland and you just want to flavor it
a little bit then I'd say you can do
this but just don't add any salt when
you're preparing your meal so when
you're cooking your soup don't add any
when it's in your bowl just sprinkle a
little bit of salt on the surface and
then those salt granules are going to be
hitting your taste buds directly and
you're going to get that satisfaction
from the salt without having to take in
a lot of sodium and if you think you're
still experiencing water retention I
would bring down your salt allowance to
500 milligrams or less and you should
definitely notice an improvement for me
personally I don't add salt to my meals
just because I feel it really affects me
if I have even a little bit I notice
I'll wake up next morning and my face
will be puffy and I just really don't
feel my best and so if you're like this
and you'd like to start cutting back on
salt or maybe cutting it out completely
I'll come up with a video soon on
different techniques that you can
do this because you can definitely
replace salt with other flavors in your
meal so definitely stay tuned for that
video if you got anything out of this
one then please remember to Like comment
share and subscribe have an abundant day
Earthlings and see you next video bye I
am a songbird you've gone for growth boy
saw this